docs: design tokens ADR (#1929)
openedx/paragon: docs/decisions/0019-scaling-styles-with-design-tokens.rst

19.  Scaling the Paragon design system's styles with design tokens and ``style-dictionary``
###########################################################################################

Status
======

Provisional

Context
=======

A critical component of the Open edX platform is the ability to customize its visual styles to reflect the custom brand of its consumers in the Open edX community. Historically, the Open edX platform (via ``edx-platform``) has supported a comprehensive theming system fulfilling the community's theming needs, including brand customization but also functionality, too (e.g., modifying, adding, or removing user interface elements). However, as we've moved towards React micro-frontends, the theming from a brand customization perspective has been largely replaced by the theming system provided by the Paragon design system.

> Within Paragon, "theming" predominantly refers to brand customization as it relates to visual styles. It does not intend to be responsible for customization of functionality as in the historical sense of comprehensive theming in ``edx-platform``. Enabling such customization to bring comprehensive theming support to micro-frontends is on the roadmap for the Frontend Working Group as a separate initiative outside of Paragon itself.

Reviewer: > Enabling such customization to bring comprehensive theming support to micro-frontends is on the roadmap for the Frontend Working Group as a separate initiative outside of Paragon itself.

I'd be happy if this sentence weren't there. 😂  I feel pretty strongly that comprehensive theming is not a thing we want to promote or enable for micro-frontends; we should find less invasive mechanisms for doing common theming tasks.

Author: @davidjoy [inform] I updated this sentence to say, "The Frontend Working Group's roadmap includes improvements to micro-frontend customizability.", without an explicit mention of assuming parity to comprehensive theming.

Current styles architecture
---------------------------

> Today, Paragon's core styles are heavily based on `Bootstrap 4 <https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.6/getting-started/introduction/>`__. The decision to rely on Bootstrap was to extend a popular, existing repsonsive CSS framework to get an initial design system created more efficienctly than creating all styles from scratch in addition to general knowledge and awareness of Bootstrap throughout the frontend community (see `OEP-16 <https://open-edx-proposals.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best-practices/oep-0016-bp-adopt-bootstrap.html>`__ for more details).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Today, Paragon's core styles are heavily based on `Bootstrap 4 <https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.6/getting-started/introduction/>`__. The decision to rely on Bootstrap was to extend a popular, existing responsive CSS framework to get an initial design system created more efficiently than creating all styles from scratch in addition to general knowledge and awareness of Bootstrap throughout the frontend community (see `OEP-16 <https://open-edx-proposals.readthedocs.io/en/latest/best-practices/oep-0016-bp-adopt-bootstrap.html>`__ for more details).
```

Bootstrap 4 supports theming of visual styles through SCSS variables. As a result, Paragon's current theming system also relies overriding SCSS variables, both from core Bootstrap and custom Paragon variables.

While Paragon's SCSS theming system has largely supported Open edX's transition from building legagy UIs in Django to React micro-frontends, we have identified several challenges that hinder its continued scalability and use in micro-frontends throughout Open edX.

Challenges with current styles architecture
-------------------------------------------

> * **On theme changes, all its consuming applications must be upgraded, re-built, and re-deployed.**

Author: Yes, there is a separate chunk of work in frontend-platform ([PR](https://github.com/openedx/frontend-platform/pull/440)) to take the resulting already compiled CSS from Paragon's design tokens and ingest them as external CDN urls into MFEs based on the MFE's configuration.

With this approach, once the configuration is updated (which may be done via runtime MFE config API, without requiring any re-deploys), updates to the Paragon styles could automatically get pulled in.

For initial MVP release, we plan on relying on [jsDelivr](https://www.jsdelivr.com/documentation#id-ready-for-production), an open-source CDN heavily used in the JS ecosystem, to host the `@edx/paragon` and `@edx/brand` compiled CSS for MFEs to import.

* **Paragon styles are not platform agnostic nor a single source-of-truth.**

  * The styles associated with Paragon themes are largely only accessible in environments that support SCSS as pretty much all Paragon's style properties are baked into SCSS variables.
  * Ideally, the style properties would be defined in a platform agnostic way such that they can be transformed for various platforms, like iOS and Android apps or even a Figma integration.
  
    * *Note: these additional platform support ideas is more of a longer-term vision for how we could extend the design tokens work further in the future.*

* **Supporting both system-wide themes and organizational themes.**

  * The primary theming use case for Paragon is largely around system-wide theming, where all applications in the Open edX ecosystem share the same theme.
  * However, there are use cases for organizational themes, too (i.e., updating the colors for specific partners/organizations, enterprise customers, etc.).
  

>     * This is not well supported today and largely requires overriding CSS classes from Paragon rather than the desired approach of overriding underlying CSS variable(s). This an anti-pattern as Paragon class names should really be considered internal implementation details of Paragon components, and not used by consumers directly.

Reviewer 3: It'd be nice to have an example of organizational theming being done the "anti-pattern way" vs the "design token way" to demonstrate this.

I'm not sure where exactly the specific example could fit into the ADR, but I think this is an incredible illustration of *why* design tokens/css variables are such a great approach here

Author: @brian-smith-tcril I'll give a go at including a brief example of the Enterprise MFEs relying on overriding class names where it would instead be great for those Enterprise MFEs to rely on the design tokens tooling / CSS variables instead for a more complete/holistic organization theming solution 👍

Let me know what you think of the following verbiage I just added to this paragraph:

> For example, the Enterprise MFEs within Open edX (e.g., frontend-app-learner-portal-enterprise) inject ``<style>`` tag in the HTML document with CSS class name overrides such as ``.btn-primary { background-color: $enterpriseCustomerPrimaryColor }``. Ideally, similar use cases could instead override a CSS variable such as ``--pgn-color-btn-primary-bg`` instead such that it gets re-used throughout all Paragon styles, not just ``.btn-primary``.

In order to create a scalable, platform-agnostic way to define style properties (i.e., design tokens), Paragon will utilize ``style-dictionary`` (`docs <https://amzn.github.io/style-dictionary/#/>`__), a "build system that allows you to define styles once, in a way for any platform or language to consume."

If Paragon opted to hardcode the new CSS variables derived from the existing SCSS variables, we would still be in a situation where our design tokens are not platform-agnostic in that supporting CSS variables alone implies Paragon can only be utilized by browser-based applications.

However, one of the long-term visions for the Paragon design system is to be the source of truth for visual styles across the entire Open edX ecosystem. This includes the iOS and Android mobile applications, which currently define and manage their styles (e.g., colors, spacing, etc.) separately from the design system itself even though they share similar design principles.

By only transforming our hardcoded SCSS variables to hardcoded CSS variables, we would be missing out on the opportunity to iterate towards the vision of making the Paragon design system be platform-agnostic.

> As a result, Paragon's existing SCSS variables will be migrated to design tokens defined as JSON files that get transformed by ```style-dictonary``` into various platform-specific styles. To start, we are transforming the design tokens specified in JSON to CSS variables as well as some CSS utility classes. In the future, our approach may expand to transforming the design tokens to iOS and Android compatible files as well.

Reviewer 2: nit: there is a typo "dictonary". Also in the next line

Instead, by having the component token inherit from an alias token, theme authors can modify the alias token without needing to change the underlying global token, which helps mitigate concerns around changing a foundational style property heavily used throughout the entire design system.

In the above example, for instance, the value of ``--pgn-color-theme-default-primary`` could be changed to ``{color.primary.700}`` rather than changing the underlying value of ``{color.primary.500}`` directly, which might need to remain at its current value given its use elsewhere throughout the design system.

Additional token file examples
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Please refer to the `tokens <https://github.com/openedx/paragon/tree/alpha/tokens/src>`__ defined in the current ``alpha`` release of Paragon.

Implications for theme authors (e.g., ``@edx/brand`` packages)
------------------------------------------------------------

Currently, Paragon recommends theme authors to create a theme package such as ``@edx/brand-openedx`` (`Github <https://github.com/openedx/brand-openedx>`__) and ``@edx/brand-edx.org`` (`Github <https://github.com/edx/brand-edx.org>`__).

> While the migration from SCSS variables to CSS variables is a breaking change for theme authors, we have tried to mitigate this by keeping the existing SCSS variables but defining them such that their values refer to the new CSS variables. Because SCSS can't evaluate the CSS variable at runtime, it utilizes the CSS variable in the resulting output CSS used in the browser.

Reviewer 3: Part of me feels like it might be better to "rip the band-aid off" and directly use css vars everywhere scss vars were being used. My main worry is having a mix of scss vars and css vars scattered throughout stylesheets preventing a true "source of truth" for a value.

For example, let's say we have `my-scss-var-foo` set to `my-css-var-foo`:
* if all the stylesheets use `my-scss-var-foo`, and never use `my-css-var-foo` directly, changing `my-scss-var-foo` to be `my-css-var-bar` would work as expected.
* howerver, if some stylesheets use `my-scss-var-foo` and some use `my-css-var-foo`, changing `my-scss-var-foo` could lead to unexpected behavior.

I can think of 2 possible ways to prevent this problem:
* Watch PRs that change scss vars like a hawk, don't let it happen
* Only use css vars

I know there was probably a lot of discussion/thought put into this decision, I'd love to hear any thoughts (or if there was a pros/cons list) that came up when building towards this strategy.

Author: @brian-smith-tcril I agree, this should likely be revisited. We did "rip the b(r)and-aid off" (pardon the terrible pun with the (r) haha!) in `@edx/paragon` itself by updating all the general theme and component styles to no longer use the SCSS variable in favor of using the CSS variable directly (e.g., see `Alert` [styles](https://github.com/openedx/paragon/blob/cc022bb0b071101d0bc3a6392f0ec69f5b874e5d/src/Alert/Alert.scss#L13)).

However, Paragon also does still have the `_variables.scss` file around in the `alpha` release, where each of the SCSS variables point to the associated CSS variable. I agree this isn't ideal for maintainability/understandability (e.g., single source of truth). Would you agree that we should likely delete `_variables.scss` in the design tokens release, if possible, at this point? Consumers should no longer be importing anything from Paragon's SCSS directly anymore but would need to verify that the `build-scss` script in Paragon doesn't rely on `_variables.scss`.

Furthermore, given CSS variables may be generated and consumed by applications in numerous ways, it's worth mentioning alternative strategies as well.

For example, the above approach largely assumes you're able to generate and use a CSS file containing CSS variable overrides in consuming applications for each desired theme. It may be impractical to generate and host a CSS file for each dynamically generated theme, e.g. if the theme is driven by user input or the theme values (like HEX values) are stored in a database, retrieved by an API.

In such cases, consumers could also directly override CSS variables at runtime by generating and injecting them into the ``<head>`` of the HTML document (e.g., with ``react-helmet``) after retrieving the values from an API, which would result in overriding the core Paragon CSS variables as well.

Future considerations: Customizing the theme via a user interface
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> More forward thinking, we would also like to explore creating a UI on top of these design tokens such that the understanding and writing of JSON files is abstracted away from theme authors. Such a UI may also enable designers to self-serve update the theme.

Reviewer: [naive question] Is there a way for Figma to be a potential source of truth for the design tokens via some sort of export?  Just thinking about designers getting to use a powerful industry standard tool they're familiar with vs. a tool we have to maintain.

Author: Yep, this is definitely part of the long term vision! For example, the [Tokens Studio](https://tokens.studio/) plugin for Figma has a GitHub Sync feature that could enable a two-way sync between design tokens defined in code and Figma, where designers could even self-serve update the value of design tokens and see their changes propagate throughout the whole system with minimal engineering effort (e.g., changing a single color across the platform).

I'm surprised this wasn't included in the example potential benefits here! I will include some words about this.

Though this theme customization UI is not included in the initial release of design tokens and CSS variables, there is desire to do some prototyping to see what might be possible; other groups in the community may also have the capacity to run with it as well.

That said, such UI considerations thus far have largely been for theme authors at the system/provider level, not so much at the user level. It may be interesting to explore whether Paragon could (and/or should) expose some generic and flexible helper components, hooks, functions, etc. that consuming applications could utilize to simplify the creation and injection of a dynamic, user-driven theme's CSS variables. 

> As a more concrete example, consuming applications could, in theory, use an exported function from Paragon that accepts a list of JSON and/or JavaScript objects as design tokens (similar to importing all the token files in the tokens build) and then run ``style-dictionary`` with the same (or extended) config on these custom tokens and the core Paragon tokens to generate the dynamic CSS variables. This solution, too, is still pretty raw and is likely out of scope of the initial design tokens release and this ADR.

Reviewer 4: OpenCraft have an open source UI for customising themes that currently uses edx/configuration which generates SCSS variables, but we were planning on adapting it in the future to be a standalone MFE for updating the theme using whatever mechanism is adopted for runtime theming. 

We'd love to collaborate on this, and potentially make it a kind of first-setup/onboarding MFE.

Author: FWIW, I think there's a couple different related use cases here.

As you're describing, I think, there could be a UI for customizing themes/tokens and generating resulting CSS files on disk. I believe there may also be use cases for needing to expose the `style-dictionary` tooling from Paragon as an API (e.g., on a Node.js Express server) that may be called at runtime to generate CSS variables based on custom token values stored in a database. In this case, since the application needs to generate CSS variables with custom design tokens at runtime, I believe the only way (afaik) to get MFEs to run `style-dictionary` is through a Node.js-based API.

I will also mention the API-based use case in this paragraph.
